For my 12th Birthday, my father had gifted me a techno-thriller novel, Digital Fortress, by Dan Brown. For me, the most enticing and gripping part of the novel wasn’t the underlying clandestine mystery, it was the introduction to the world of cryptography, hacking, algorithms cyber security, as well as the science of running large-scale algorithm pipelines. As I advanced in the novel the character of the sharp, proactive, NSA cryptographer Susan Fletcher became my inspiration. I read the novel several times more, experiencing each time an adrenaline rush. The novel influenced my interests towards computer science as a career path, prompting me to try my hand at puzzles, anagrams, and problem solving.  My natural aptitude in these skills gradually developed into a flair for programming and love for code, which, in the last few months, has transformed into a love for data science and engineering. I am able to envision a rewarding career in data science and engineering for myself, one that aligns with my skills and passion.  


The curriculum at my undergraduate university gave me a comprehensive knowledge of the gamut of computer science disciplines, such as data structures, algorithmic analysis and design, data mining, as well as the foundations of AI. These courses in turn have inspired me to pursue interdisciplinary graduate studies with research. I feel a natural inclination towards courses related to data storage and retrieval at a large scale, machine learning, deep learning and more. I've also dabbled in robotics, which I believe is one field that would benefit immensely, from the "algorithmic engineering" one works on, as a data scientist.


The projects that I undertook as an undergraduate helped me to earn a better understanding of algorithm analysis and gain proficiency in programming languages like C, C++, Java and Python, as well as domain-specific languages like SQL. To apply my skills and engage in practical research, I worked on a mobile payment service, which was a shopping application, designed for use on handheld devices such as a mobile phone. It was modified to conform to the low memory capacity of wireless portable devices and low bandwidth of networks in developing countries. To implement what I've learnt about machine learning and gain further insights in the field of natural language processing, I designed and implemented an automated subjective answer sheet checker that can be applied to evaluate answer sheets based on a set of predefined criteria for obtaining a cumulative score. A series of stages were involved in the designing of the system such as tokenizing, part-of-speech tagging, chunking, named entity recognition and semantic role labeling. The design was innovative and was applauded at the university level project competition where it was nominated among the top 10 projects. The transformations this project underwent as it materialized into a functional system provided me greater understanding of the field. The modifications made to the system were significant in helping me appreciate the importance of continuous improvement and perseverance required in research. Perhaps one of the most significant applications of data science was while working with a startup in New Delhi, which was working closely with the Indian military, to design better models for combat modeling; we were essentially designing clustering algorithms, that would, for example, help artillery units determine how shell fragments affected enemy targets, or helping motorized infantry commanders plan ammunition supply better, using a combination of Bayesian methods and mathematical optimization. My experience here showed me how data science was a field that could be used to solve more real-world problems than many of us think. But I also saw that data science, is powerful enough to be misinterpreted - or worse, misused. Maybe that's something I'd like to work on someday - the vagaries and ethics of data science.


I had the opportunity to work as an intern at the Larsen & Toubro Group in the summer of 2011, which I seized. It gave me an invaluable first hand experience in the corporate world. It gave me excellent insights into how data plays a pivotal role in an organization, and how data-driven decisions tend to give better returns than decisions taken in an ad-hoc manner. I also happened to intern at Aircel, a large Indian telecom provider, in the summer of 2012. As it so happened, I ended up taking lead on building a web interface for the telecom network's value-added services. Working on that got me stronger with my presentation skills, and enhanced my ability to work in teams, consisting of people with different experiences, roles and goals. <INSERT ADOBE EXPERIENCE HERE>  


I've always had a good academic record, which led to me winning a scholarship in high school for two years straight - I believe that's a mark of my innate trait to excel in academic endeavors. Being a member of the Computer Society of India and being heavily involved in organizing and co-ordinating cultural and technical events at undergrad school, as well as organizing blood donation camps for cancer patients and being involved with empowerment projects for people below the poverty line - they all honed my skills as a leader and an organizer. 


<--PERSONALIZED CONTENT FOR COLLEGES-->
While the internships and projects have taught me a great deal, I believe that they're just the beginning. The comprehensive studies being conducted at USC, such as the research efforts of ICT Natural Language Dialogue Group towards Natural Language Generation, are immensely knowledgeable to delve further into the field of Natural Language Processing. The work carried out at MELODY lab under professor Yan Liu and her paper on latent graphical models for quantifying and predicting patent quality is commendable and in resonance with my interest in Machine Learning. Its the kind of work I wish to be a part of and working on such projects under the eminent faculty of University of Southern California (USC) would help me in enhancing the knowledge I have acquired in these areas during my undergraduate study.  


I find the graduate program at USC in harmony with my professional inclination towards data science. Being equally good in other areas of computer science, completing a masters degree here will enable me to dive into data science, and help add value by solving some of the world's pressing problems. While a graduate program is not for the faint of heart, I believe I can not only handle that, but do quite well, in all honesty. I hope to not only be a part of your stimulating academic environment but also learn greatly at each stage of my graduate study and make notable contributions to the Department of Computer Science at USC. 